Thousands of queue-hardened Soviets on Wednesday cheerfully lined up to get a taste of `` gamburgers , '' `` chizburgers '' and `` Filay-o-feesh '' sandwiches as McDonald 's opened in the land of Lenin for the first time .
The world 's largest version of the landmark American fast-food chain rang up 30,000 meals on 27 cash registers , breaking the opening-day record for McDonald 's worldwide , officials said .
The Soviets , bundled in fur coats and hats , seemed unfazed , lining up before dawn outside the 700-seat restaurant , the first of 20 planned across the Soviet Union .
The crush of customers was so intense the company stayed open until midnight , two hours later than planned .
`` And it was only 10 rubles for all this , '' she said .
`` I 'm taking it back for the girls at the factory to try '' .
Big Macs were priced at 3.75 rubles and double cheeseburgers at 3 rubles _ about two hours ' pay for a starting McDonald 's staffer or the average Soviet , but much cheaper than other private restaurants that have sprung up recently .
The official exchange rate is $ 1.59 per ruble but foreign visitors can buy rubles for 16 cents each , about what the currency is worth on the black market .
Half the day 's sales were donated to the Soviet Children 's Fund , which provides medical care and assistance to orphans and disadvantaged children , Gary Reinblatt , senior vice president of McDonald 's Canada , said from Toronto .
The restaurant , built by the company in a joint venture with the city of Moscow that began 14 years ago , brought to 52 the number of countries where McDonald 's operates .
The previous opening-day record for sales was in Budapest , company officials said .
Besides its restaurants in the United States , the leading number of McDonald 's are in Canada and Japan , the officials said .
Soviets got a first-hand look at such alien concepts as efficiency and fast , friendly service .
Normally dour citizens broke into grins as they caught the infectious cheerful mood from youthful Soviet staffers hired for their ability to smile and work hard .
Accordions played folk songs and women in traditional costumes danced with cartoon characters , including Mickey Mouse and Baba Yaga , a witch of Russian fairy tales .
One Muscovite , accustomed to clerks who snarl if they say anything at all , asked for a straw and was startled when a smiling young Soviet woman found him one and popped it straight into his drink .
For most customers , it was their first experience with a hamburger .
Sandwiches were served in the familiar bag marked with the golden arches , but were packed in wrappers bearing Cyrillic letters , approximating `` gamburger '' .
They tried them one-handed .
They picked their sandwiches apart to examine the contents .
One young woman finally squashed her `` Beeg Mak '' to fit her lips around it .
`` It tasted great '' ! a 14-year-old boy said .
`` It 's a lot different from a stolovaya , '' he continued with a smile , referring to the much cheaper but run-down dirty cafeterias that slop rice and fat or boiled sausage .
Under the sign of the golden arches , accented by the Soviet hammer-and-sickle flag , hundreds lined up for the long-awaited grand opening at 10 a.m. on Pushkin Square , reaching out excitedly for McDonald 's flags and pins as the hamburger chain 's army fulfilled the Soviet penchant for souvenirs with Western logos .
Publicity-conscious managers had the staff shout `` Good morning , America '' ! in English and Russian , for an American TV network .
McDonald 's of Canada Chairman George Cohon , the man behind the deal , said many people were buying multiple orders and the restaurant served 15,000 to 20,000 people in just the first five hours of operation .
The restaurant limited purchases to 10 Big Macs per customer in hopes of preventing burger-scalping .
McDonald 's built its own factory , including bakery , dairy , meat-processing plant and even potato storage yard , to provide its own guaranteed supplies in a country where up to 25 percent of the harvest rots en route to the consumer .
One McDonald 's associate said the company wound up importing wooden crates from Finland for storing potatoes because `` when they went to build crates , they found there was no wood , and no nails .
They found you need a permit to buy nails . ''
For the New York Philharmonic , it was supposed to be a night of Beethoven and Shostakovich .
The fates made it a night of Leonard Bernstein .
The official catalog of his works says Bernstein led 74 orchestras .
But this was HIS orchestra , and the musicians came to pay tribute to THEIR laureate conductor , who led them through 1,244 concerts during his 47-year association with the Philharmonic .
They let his music do the talking .
`` Tonight 's concert is not an evening in which we want to dwell on the passing of a giant , but rather what he has left us , '' guest conductor Leonard Slatkin told the audience at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday night .
So four nights after Bernstein 's death at age 72 , Beethoven 's `` Violin Concerto '' became Bernstein 's `` Serenade for Solo Violin , String Orchestra , Harp and Percussion '' -LRB- 1954 -RRB- ; Shostakovich 's `` Symphony No. 4 '' became Bernstein 's `` Symphony No. 1 -LRB- Jeremiah -RRB- , '' written in 1942 .
Also added were his `` Chichester Psalms '' -LRB- 1965 -RRB- and his overture to `` Candide '' -LRB- 1956 -RRB- .
The substitute Bernstein program was being repeated Friday night , Saturday and Tuesday .
It was an extraordinary concert .
There were n't many smiling faces among the audience or musicians .
Slatkin 's brief introductory comments , followed by the whimsical `` Candide , '' broke some of the tension .
Then came the eclectic `` Serenade , '' which Bernstein 's program notes says is supposed to be based on Plato 's `` Symposium '' .
It begins with a lyrical praise of the Eros , the god of love .
The piece is sometimes jocular , sometimes melancholy , sometimes assaulting and sometimes hedonistic .
It ends in drunken revelry , an intrusion of jazz - as if Bernstein was looking down from heaven and telling the audience , `` It 's O.K. to smile tonight '' .
The soloist - concertmaster Glenn Dicterow - played with much agility , especially through the difficult double stops and especially considering the lack of preparation time .
The mourning returned after intermission , but not without optimism .
`` Jeremiah '' begins with suspenseful strings , followed by a cantorial French horn , a melodic return to the strings and then a prophetic blaring of brass .
The second movement continues the point-counterpoint of brass versus strings -LRB- Jeremiah versus the corrupt priests , with Nebuchadnezzar looming on the horizon -RRB- .
In the third movement , Jerusalem has fallen to the Babylonian king .
Judea is exiled .
Jeremiah weeps .
`` How she sits desolate - `` The city once so full of people - `` She is become as a widow '' .
During her chanting of the prophet 's `` Lamentations , '' mezzo-soprano Wendy White had to wipe a tear from her eye .
S did members of the audience .
Last on the program was another Hebraic elegy , `` Chichester Psalms '' .
The New York Choral Artists and a boy soloist joined the orchestra .
Two harpists dominated the center of the crowded stage .
`` Awake , psaltery and harp '' ! the choir begins in Hebrew .
`` I will rouse the dawn '' .
In the second movement an angelic 8th-grader , Evan Weber , sings King David 's 23rd Psalm , `` The Lord is my shepherd , I shall not want '' .
After he finishes , the men 's chorus bellows : `` Why do the nations rage '' ?
The piece , however , ends in a Mahlerian motif and chorus declaring a message Bernstein had sought for society : `` Behold how good , `` And how pleasant it is , `` For brethren to dwell `` Together in unity '' .
To emphasize the point after the final note , Slatkin suspended his hands for several long moments of silence .
Then came the cascade of applause .
For Leonard Bernstein .
Hurricane Hugo struck South Carolina with renewed fury Thursday after thousands of coastal residents in southeastern states grabbed what they could carry and fled inland on jammed highways .
`` This is a disaster staring us right in the eye , '' Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr. said from his City Hall command post in Charleston , where the hurricane downed power lines , snapped trees and caused utility transformers to explode .
`` All we can do now is pray and hope all the precautions we have taken have been sufficient , '' Riley said as Hugo 's eye bore in on the city .
`` I just hope and pray we can get through this without any loss of life '' .
By midnight , 119 mph winds were reported in Charleston .
The roof cracked at City Hall , a 188-year-old brick building that has withstood several hurricanes , and torrents of water poured into the paneled council chamber .
Phone and electric service to the command post was knocked out .
Hurricane-force winds first hit the coast by 9:15 p.m. EDT , and about three hours later the eye of the storm passed over the Isle of Palms just east of Charleston , said Bob Sheets , director of the National Hurricane Center in Coral Gables , Fla. .
The eye was about 10 miles across and top winds were still at 135 mph . Hugo was expected to turn gradually to the north , causing severe flooding as it moved up the East Coast .
The storm posed a 19 percent chance of hitting New York City and a 16 percent chance of hitting Boston before Sunday night , the hurricane center said .
As Hugo neared the coast , roads from Hilton Head to Myrtle Beach , 200 miles north , were nearly empty , as were the boarded-up resort towns themselves .
Power lines and trees were downed in some spots and water flooded roads .
Stop lights and neon lights were knocked out in Myrtle Beach .
`` One eyewitness said ` It 's like a light show , '' ' said Amy Garrison , a reporter at WKZQ AM-FM in Myrtle Beach .
In Charleston , the hurricane littered streets with tin roofs , palmetto fronds and chunks of bark .
Businesses were closed and classes at public schools and universities canceled .
Riley ordered residents of one-story homes to evacuate .
Hospitals stockpiled supplies , discharging any patients well enough to go and moving others to hospitals inland to make room for emergency patients , officials said .
About 12,000 people had checked into 83 shelters across the state as of Thursday evening , and more were expected , said Bennish Brown , a spokesman for the Emergency Operations Center in Columbia , 220 miles northwest of here .
`` We tried to close the doors but people are sneaking in side doors , '' said Elaine Skelton , a registered nurse working at the Conway High School shelter near Myrtle Beach .
`` We tried to post guards at the doors , but people were still coming in '' .
American Red Cross relief efforts were buckling under the number of evacuees , said Brian Ruberry , a spokesman in Savannah , Ga. , who appealed for help .
`` Right now the Red Cross is sheltering tens of thousands of people all along the Eastern seaboard .
This of course is at the same time that we 're sheltering 25,000 people on Puerto Rico and the other Caribbean islands .
`` We 're beginning to feel the squeeze .
Our resources are very tight .
Right now Hugo is shaping up to be one of our biggest relief operations of the decade '' .
At midnight , the center of Hugo was near latitude 32.7 degrees north and longitude 79.9 degrees west , forecasters said .
The hurricane 's speed had picked up to 22 mph from 20 mph earlier .
Near its center , Hugo 's muscle reached winds of 135 mph , up from 125 mph earlier in the day and 105 mph the day before .
North and South Carolina can expect tornadoes linked to Hugo for the next two days , according to the hurricane center .
The coastal area could expect hurricane force winds for 10 to 12 hours once the eye comes ashore , officials said .
A hurricane warning was in effect between Fernandina Beach , Fla. , and Oregon Inlet , N.C.
By late afternoon , Hugo was upgraded to a category 4 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson scale of strength , the second mightiest category , which indicated it could cause extreme damage .
`` It strengthened more than we thought it would , '' Sheets said , adding that Hugo would cause severe flooding as it moved up the Appalachians .
The timing of the landfall was critical because of the storm 's tidal surge , a dome of water 10 to 15 feet high that would feed a normal 5-foot high tide that peaks after 2 a.m.
`` On top of that will be waves , '' Sheets said earlier , and in many places on barrier islands `` the buildings will be swept clean off . ''
The Alabama National Guard is still hauling up to 25,000 gallons of water a day to 10 communities across the state despite recent rains .
At the height of the drought last month , the Guard was hauling water to 12 locations .
The Guard 's water-hauling program has been in continuous operation since last July in west-central Alabama because of a low water table .
In an effort to help Georgia farmers locate hay , the state Department of Agriculture announced it will start compiling a list of sources .
Commissioner Tommy Irvin urged those with a surplus for sale to contact the department .
He said information will be compiled and updated regularly .
State Treasurer Jerry Cosentino announced a program to provide drought-stricken farmers with access to commercial loans with below-market interest rates .
The treasurer 's office will commit $ 50 million to banks at a lower-than-normal interest yield and in turn those banks will offer farmers loans with rates as low as 10 percent .
`` I know what the farmers first need is rain but that is out of our hands right now , '' Cosentino said .
`` The next best thing they can get ...
would be additional funds to carry them over until next year . ''
A group of Indiana farmers sued a New Jersey insurance company , saying the company acted in bad faith when it reneged on $ 2.5 million in drought insurance .
The lawsuit seeks an `` undeterminable '' amount of damages from Pio-Gard Agency of Ohio Inc. and Federal Insurance Co. , a subsidiary of the Chubb Group Insurance Cos. of Warren , N.J .
Forecasters say Iowa 's weather is returning to the hot , dry drought pattern which settled over the state for much of June .
The first emergency shipment of Oregon hay to help drought-stricken Kentucky farmers arrived , but logistical problems forced agriculture officials to delay its distribution until next week .
`` It 's a nightmare trying to find a fair way to do this , '' said Roger Nesbitt , a spokesman for the Kentucky Department of Agriculture .
Nesbitt said Wednesday 's 20-ton shipment , flown free from Portland , Ore. , by United Parcel Service , will be sold to farmers on Monday .
Heavy rain fell on some of the driest areas of central and east-central Minnesota , but it was `` way , way below what we should have , as far as precipitation goes , '' a National Weather Service hydrologist said .
`` We need ...
a widespread distribution over a long period of time , say maybe 10 inches of rainfall to get us back to what we normally should be , '' Gary McDevitt said .
It was the heaviest rainfall for the east-central part of the state since April 26 , when the area got about a half-inch of rain .
Weather experts say Mississippi could see above normal rainfall in the coming week .
Rainfall during the week ending Wednesday averaged 1 inch in some areas , with some extreme northern counties receiving greater amounts .
But the weather service said all Mississippi farm communities still had only 30 percent to 50 percent of normal moisture .
Road builders in the Kansas City area say the effects of dry weather in the Midwest this year are not all bad .
Engineers say several highway projects in the area will be open to traffic at least a month earlier than expected because of fewer interruptions caused by rain and wet weather . __
As many as 20 fires , sparked by lightning from thunderstorms , have blackened about 1,500 acres in the Custer National Forest .
The fires are being fought by from 150 to 200 firefighters .
A lightning-caused fire in the Bob Marshall Wilderness Area of northwest Montana was being allowed to burn naturally , officials said .
State Agriculture Director Roy Frederick said Nebraska farmers probably will have better crops than are expected nationwide and may benefit from higher prices .
Nebraska 's outlook for the corn crop is rosier than national predictions because 75 percent of the corn comes from irrigated acres and Nebraska has received more rain than some other states , he said .
Gov. George Sinner has asked federal officials to declare all 53 North Dakota counties disaster areas because of the drought .
Sinner says the drought has wiped out small grain crops and is beginning to take a toll on row crops .
The State Agricultural Statistics Service said North Dakota farmers will abandon 31 percent of their spring wheat this year and harvest the smallest crop in 19 years because of the drought .
That compares to a normal abandonment of about 5 percent .
Abandonment has not been so high in the state since the 1930s .
Lt.
Gov. Paul Leonard , who heads a state drought task force , said he would not advocate statewide mandatory water restrictions but said local governments should have the authority to impose restrictions where necessary .
In central Ohio , farmers awaited what will be the largest haylift of the season _ 50 truckloads of hay from the South scheduled to arrive Thursday night in Columbus .
Thunderstorms hit Brown County with heavy rain and hail that damaged drought-stricken crops .
Rain was heavy north and east of Aberdeen and spotty elsewhere .
Stanley and Thelma Dennert , who live three miles west of Houghton , reported 3.75 inches of rain within an hour .
`` It was hard with a little bit of hail .
It really came down in sheets , '' said Mrs. Dennert .
Authorities said no tornado sightings were confirmed , but about a dozen funnel clouds were reported .
The drought-plagued Mississippi River measured seventh-tenths of a foot higher than expected at Memphis because of rainfall throughout West Tennessee .
The Mississippi was still 21 feet lower than normal for this time of year , however , and the Coast Guard said the slight rise had no effect on commercial traffic on the river .
The drought has dried up summer jobs at the Stokley USA cannery in Merrill .
During most summers , the plant provides three months ' employment for about 300 workers on three shifts , but this year there are only 225 seasonal employees on two shifts , said Vern Warren , plant manager .
`` It 's been on and off so far .
The drought conditions have made it a little difficult for us , '' Warren said .
WHILE Hurricane Andrew was wreaking havoc across large parts of southern Florida and Louisiana this week , a grade two dollar crisis -LRB- on a one-to-four scale , four being most severe -RRB- was blowing itself out at the end of a tumultuous few days for US and world financial markets .
On Wall Street , most of the damage from the currency storm was inflicted a week ago Friday and on the following Monday , when bond yields jumped sharply and the Dow Jones industrial average plunged by more than 75 points .
The flimsy walls erected hastily by the Federal Reserve and other big central banks to protect the vulnerable dollar from a tidal wave of selling on foreign exchange markets failed to hold ; and as the sellers poured through the breached barricades , the currency dropped to DM1 .40 .
This was its lowest-ever point against the D-mark .
The conditions necessary for a dollar crisis had been building up in currency markets for some time .
Interest rate differentials between US and Germany widened over the summer as the Fed eased , and the Bundesbank tightened , their respective monetary policies .
The failure of the US economy to climb out of recession with any vigor was also making overseas investors increasingly unhappy about holding the dollar .
So , too , was the political hole President Bush had dug for himself in a re-election battle that only a year ago was supposed to be a shoo-in for the incumbent .
Moreover , the fact that almost every central bank worth its salt was in the markets trying to prop up the dollar served only to convince foreign exchange dealers that the currency was heading in one direction - down .
While there were plenty of reasons for the dealers to sell the dollar , the logic for such a strongly negative reaction from bond and stock markets was less obviously compelling .
There are two standard explanations why a weak dollar prompts bond prices to fall .
The first is that it raises import prices and , as a result , adds to inflationary pressures .
The second is that it makes it hard for the Fed to engineer another cut in interest rates to stimulate the flagging recovery , and raises the possibility that rates may actually have to go up to protect the currency .
The first explanation is not particularly convincing - imports account for not much more than 10 per cent of US gross domestic product , so higher import prices do not greatly effect the overall price level , which is now around 3 per cent and heading lower .
The second explanation carries more weight .
Although there is not much chance , given the present economic and political climate , that the Fed will raise rates to help the dollar , there is little doubt that the currency 's weakness makes it extremely difficult for the Fed to ease monetary policy again .
The fear that the Fed may be done with interest rate cuts for the present economic cycle was also behind the selling in equity markets .
But investors in stocks were equally , if not more , troubled by the rise in bond yields .
The dollar put paid to those hopes and , by the middle of this week , it was approaching 7.45 per cent , putting an upward pressure on the all-important mortgage rate for home-buyers .
The dollar was not the only story in financial markets this week , and the devastating effect of Hurricane Andrew produced a typically hard-eyed , although nonetheless logical , reaction from Wall Street .
The stocks of those insurance companies with the greatest exposure in southern Florida , the area hit worst by the hurricane , all took a tumble .
But the relatively modest losses in Geico , Travelers and Progressive suggested that the market believed the insurers were reserved or reinsured adequately enough to cover hurricane-related claims .
The flip side of the hurricane 's coin was a strong showing from the stocks of home construction companies expected to benefit from demand for rebuilding damaged or destroyed homes .
Since there are an estimated 250,000 people left homeless by the storm , there is a lot of work to be done .
The biggest gains among construction stocks this week were posted by Lennar , Oakwood Homes , Engle Homes and Fleetwood , the largest maker of pre-manufactured homes in the US .
A tornado slammed into a shopping district , a residential area and a school Wednesday , killing at least 15 people , injuring more than 300 and trapping people in cars and homes , authorities said .
`` It 's total destruction where the tornado hit .
Cars are piled on top of each other under piles of rubble where buildings used to be , '' said Danny Cooper , state emergency management director in Montgomery .
Emergency officials in Huntsville reported 15 confirmed deaths , said Henry Jurnigan , a duty officer with the state Emergency Management Agency in Montgomery .
Mayor Steve Hettinger said 305 people were injured and about 500 displaced by the tornado that struck while streets of this northeastern Alabama city filled with rush-hour traffic .
Rescue teams with cranes and floodlights searched the rubble through the night for injured or dead .
`` Several people are still trapped in vehicles and apartment complexes and shopping areas , '' said police spokesman Ben Jennings after the twister touched down between 4 and 4:30 p.m. in the city 's south section .
`` It may be tomorrow before we have a final count , '' Gov. Guy Hunt said at the state 's disaster center in Montgomery .
The governor dispatched 50 National Guardsmen , along with search and rescue equipment .
Rescuers picked through piles of rubble 10 to 14 feet deep , and Cooper said police were unable to determine the extent of the damaged area .
Rescuers also were hampered by darkness and plunging temperatures .
`` We 're even having a few snowflakes , '' said Cooper .
High temperatures in Huntsville were expected to be in the 30s Thursday , he said .
Witnesses said the downtown Jones Valley Elementary School , the Waterford Square and adjacent Queensbury apartment complexes were reduced to rubble by the tornado .
`` The only thing left standing was a door frame , '' news photographer Mike Mercier said of the school , which was empty of staff and pupils when the tornado hit .
Police reported one person killed in a car outside the school .
Authorities said at least five were killed at Waterford Square apartments , three at a business school , Southern Junior College , which is located in a converted movie theater , and others in scattered areas .
`` Rescuers are digging in the rubble , '' state trooper W.L. Kelly said .
He said two people were killed when the twister hit house trailers in rural areas east of Huntsville .
The fifth death was reported near the shopping district .
The city is home to Marshall Space Flight Center and the Army 's Redstone Arsenal , but no serious damage was reported from the space agency or weapons testing center .
`` We 've called in troopers from around the state to help , '' Kelly said .
Telephone communication and electricity were disrupted by the tornadoes and WAAY-TV , the only station still broadcasting , reported widespread damage .
`` It came in with a huge roar , an enormous amount of water , and it just started shaking and tearing at everything it could get hold of , '' said real estate broker Ike Carroll , who was in his car when the twister struck .
`` It started picking cars up and pushing them around , ...
some of them upside down , some of them just strewn around , '' he said .
Heavy overhead power lines `` started snapping just like a circus performer would snap his whip , '' Carroll said .
`` All of these heavy arcing , flashing lines that were just popping and snapping over the top of us ...
it was as if you were looking into an arc-welder , they were so bright , '' he said .
WAAY reported at least one person died when the roof of a business collapsed from winds that overturned cars in the area .
A nearby shopping center also was damaged .
Humana Hospital administrator David Miller said doctors were having difficulty reaching the hospital because of blocked roads .
The National Weather Service earlier said a tornado hit the east Alabama hamlet of Mellow Valley , severely damaging at least one home and causing some injuries .
Weather officials said people were trapped inside a collapsed house .
A spokeswoman for the Clay County Sheriff 's Department said people were injured at one house in a rural area 30 miles east of Sylacauga .
Another tornado touched down about 1:30 p.m. as severe weather swept across much of Alabama and the National Weather Service placed most of the state under a tornado watch .
A third tornado was reported shortly before 3:30 p.m. crossing the Coosa River near Titus in east Alabama , the Weather Service said .
In Georgia , five people were injured , four critically , and at least 200 people evacuated after a tornado struck two mobile home parks and an interstate highway near Palmetto , about 25 miles southeast of Atlanta , authorities said .
Authorities in southwestern North Carolina said a pair of storm-spawned tornadoes struck around 10:45 p.m. , destroying a vacant house in Henderson County .
The National Weather Service also reported tornadoes inflicting minor property damage in Kentucky and Mississippi .
The 1988 Summer Olympics , kept free of terrorism but tainted by drug scandals , closed Sunday with the pealing of a medieval bell to symbolize the sorrow of parting .
The United States finished third in medals .
The 1,000-year-old , 72-ton Emille Bell , which according to Korean legend has the saddest tone of any in the world , tolled farewell to the more than 9,000 athletes from 160 nations who participated in the 24th Olympiad .
The 16-day event , conducted under extraordinary security , wrapped up with the Soviet Union winning the lion 's share of the 237 medals events .
The Soviets took home 132 medals , including 55 gold , the most ever in a Summer Olympics without a major-power boycott .
East Germany had 102 medals and 37 gold , and the United States 94 medals and 36 gold .
Many felt that the United States was robbed of a second-place tie for golds when judges awarded a bout to a South Korean boxer over American Roy Jones in the 156-pound event on the final day of competition .
Because of boycotts in 1980 and 1984 , the Games were the first meeting between the Soviet Union and the United States since 1976 in Montreal , and matchups between the two nations provided some of the Games ' highlights .
The U.S. men 's volleyball team beat the Soviets to defend its 1984 Olympic championship , providing consolation for America 's upset in the men 's basketball quarterfinals .
America also defeated the Soviets in women 's basketball and men 's water polo .
At least 1 billion people watched the Olympics via a 115-nation , worldwide TV hookup .
The Seoul Games had the greatest number of athletes -LRB- 9,633 -RRB- , the most countries , the most gold medals and the most venues -LRB- 34 -RRB- .
Communist North Korea , which demanded a role in the Games , boycotted them , but the only sports power to follow suit was Cuba .
Among the highlights : _ Greg Louganis won the Olympic Spirit Award as top American athlete Sunday for winning gold medals in platform and 3-meter springboard diving .
He accomplished the same feat in 1980 and became the first man to sweep the events twice .
The 28-year-old Louganis , who hit his head on the board in the preliminaries and received five stitches , announced his retirement from diving and said he wanted to pursue acting .
_ Sisters-in-law Florence Griffith Joyner and Jackie Joyner-Kersee led an American assault on the record books in track and field .
Griffith Joyner won golds in the 100 , the 200 and the 400-meter relay , and silver in the 1,600-meter relay .
She set a world record in the 200 and an Olympic record in the 100 .
Joyner-Kersee won two golds , taking the heptathlon with a world record 7,291 points and the long jump with an Olympic mark of 24 feet , 3 inches .
_ Kristin Otto of East Germany won six golds in swimming .
American swimmer Matt Biondi won seven medals , five gold , while Janet Evans earned three golds in the pool for the United States .
_ Daniela Silivas of Romania dominated women 's gymnastics , winning three golds , two silvers and a bronze .
_ West German Steffi Graf completed tennis 's first Golden Slam , winning the gold medal as well as all four Grand Slam tournaments _ Wimbledon and the U.S. , French and Australian Opens _ in a calendar year .
There were low moments as well .
Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson , the most prominent of 10 athletes who tested positive for drugs , was stripped of his gold medal in the 100 meters and title of world 's fastest man , and flew home in disgrace , his career in jeopardy .
He was accused of using muscle-building steroids .
Four other medals _ two Bulgarian weightlifting golds , a Hungarian weightlifing silver and a British judo bronze _ also were stripped for drugs , and five non-medalists tested positive for substances ranging from caffeine to diuretics .
Early in the Games , five people connected to the Korean boxing team were suspended for attacking a New Zealand referee after a Korean lost a decision to a Bulgarian .
Another Korean boxer staged a 67-minute sit-in in the ring to protest his loss .
Anthony Hembrick , a U.S. boxer expected to win a gold , never got to fight ; his coach misread the schedule and he missed the bus to the arena .
Two gold medal-winning U.S. swimmers were arrested for carrying a stone lion 's head out of a hotel bar , but charges were dropped .
American runner Johnny Gray kicked a taxicab in an argument with its driver .
He was arrested and released .
Security measures against the possibility of terrorism were extraordinary , including metal detectors , numerous checkpoints and ID cards , but except for scattered protests by student radicals , the Games proceeded without incident .
At the closing ceremonies , before the great torch was extinguished , Korea passed the Olympic flag to representatives from Barcelona , site of the 1992 Games .
MR TEG BAHADUR Thapar was serving lunch from his stall outside the Bombay stock exchange on Friday when he was showered with flying glass and broken concrete in one of 13 explosions which rocked the city and left at least 255 people killed and over 1,200 injured .
` I 'm lucky to be alive , ' he said from his hospital bed .
` Who did this ?
Who can stop this happening again ' ?
Across Bombay people were asking themselves the same questions this weekend .
They sensed there was an enormous difference from the riots which scarred the city in December and again in January .
Those were caused by a traditional mix of crime , political agitation and ancient Hindu-Moslem hatreds stirred by the destruction of the mosque in Ayodhya .
The weapons used were mostly primitive - knives , clubs and petrol bottles .
Friday 's outrage , by contrast , bears the deadly stamp of high-technology terrorism , complete with Semtex plastic explosive , high-grade timers , efficient organization and money .
The only comparable previous incident was the assassination in 1991 of Mr Rajiv Gandhi , the former prime minister , by Sri Lanka 's Tamil Tiger terrorists .
But that was a single bomb aimed at one man - the explosions in Bombay were designed to terrorise the nation 's commercial capital .
Bombay accounts for 35 per cent of India 's exports .
Mr P V Narasimha Rao , the prime minister , described the blasts as an attack on India 's economy .
The immediate assumption both at the highest level and in the streets of Bombay was that those responsible must have been foreigners or had foreign help .
But these suggestions were seen in Bombay as a deliberate attempt to deflect attention from the people who in the popular mind are the real suspects - Moslem extremists who might have taken revenge for the riots which hit India after the Ayodhya mosque 's destruction and which left 2,000 dead , including 700 in Bombay .
If Moslems are found to have staged the attacks , the Indian authorities will certainly suspect that the operation was supported from a Moslem country , notably Pakistan .
The implications would be vast .
Breaking diplomatic relations would be the minimum step Delhi could take on a dangerous road .
Mr Rao chose his words carefully during his visit to Bombay : ` There is a definite possibility that our search may not stop within the country .
I do not want to name anybody because it will have ramifications within and outside the country ' .
There is no evidence linking the attacks to Moslem extremists , let alone to Pakistan .
Even if Moslem groups are found to be responsible for the bombings , they could have been supplied from other Moslem countries .
India would still face a diplomatic crisis but hardly on the same scale .
For the moment , such concerns seem remote from the streets on Bombay , where the atmosphere yesterday was calm .
Bombayites seemed determined to put the outrage behind them .
At the Gymkhana Club and dozens of other sports grounds , hundreds of men and boys were playing cricket as they do every Sunday .
Others were walking along the seafront by the arch of the Gateway of India .
The stock exchange authorities plan to re-start trading as soon as they can - probably today - using an old trading floor the exchange vacated only last year .
Businessmen estimated the main loss to the city would be the loss of life and injuries and the damage caused to blasted buildings .
They did not expect the same widespread disruption to production as occurred during the riots .
But much more should go to the people of Bombay , who , so far at least , have refused to be goaded into violent protest by the bombers .
Japan is going on a capital-spending binge that could make its trade surpluses even harder to shrink .
Its capital spending is growing at double-digit rates for the second year in a row , and its superefficient producers of everything from cars to computer chips are rushing to expand capacity , modernize factories and develop new products .
`` The boom 's so huge , '' says Mitsuru Saito , an economist at Sanwa Research Institute , ``it makes you think of the Golden '60s , '' when Japan developed rapidly .
The more factories and robots Japanese manufacturers add , the more they will be able to export , and the less their domestic customers will need to import .
At Canon Inc. , for example , sales are up nearly 20 % this year ; so , the maker of cameras and computer printers is doing what any Japanese company would do under the circumstances : It is increasing capital spending -- by 60 % .
It is building , among other things , a new laser-beam-printer factory in western Japan that can produce up to 150,000 printers next year .
Some 70 % of them are to be exported to the U.S. .
Even companies in smokestack industries wrestling with world-wide overcapacity are joining the boom .
Japan 's steelmakers are raising capital spending 22 % this year to $ 4.8 billion .
Hitachi Zosen Corp. , a shipbuilder buried in debt just a few years ago , will build a machinery plant , its first expansion in 14 years .
So big ICH is the capital-spending boom that Japanese companies ' outlays in Japan topped American companies ' domestic outlays by $ 521.4 billion to $ 494.8 billion in the 12 months ended March 31 even though Japan 's total output of goods and services is less than two-thirds America 's .
From a financial standpoint , the boom could n't come at a better time .
Many Japanese companies expect record profits this fiscal year , and Japanese interest rates , though up a bit recently , are still low .
And in a business system where shareholders have few rights and expect only modest dividends , companies can plow their profits back into plant and equipment .
But some economists and government officials here are n't applauding .
They fear that the boom may be too big for Japan 's or anyone else 's good .
`` It 's an explosive cocktail '' thrown at the world , says Kenneth Courtis , senior economist at the Tokyo unit of Deutsche Bank Group .
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry is so concerned that it recently took the unusual step of urging Japanese auto companies to exercise caution in capital spending .
MITI officials hope to avoid yet-another source of trade friction with the U.S. even though export restraints currently limit Japanese car exports to the U.S. .
Not everyone is worried , however .
Some economists -- and many Japanese companies -- are puzzled by the warnings .
The investment boom is mainly sparked , they say , by strong domestic demand and is n't likely to increase exports sharply .
Moreover , much investment is n't aimed at increasing capacity .
According to a survey of some 2,400 large companies by the Japan Development Bank , expanded capacity is the goal of just 51.8 % of the outlays ; for manufacturers alone , the figure is 32 % .
The manufacturers said14.2 % of their spending is designed to improve products or add new ones , 17.5 % is to cut costs , 12.5 % is for research and development , and the rest is for maintenance and other purposes .
But the worriers remain unconvinced .
With Japan running enormous trade surpluses against much of the world , they think that Japan should meet the increased domestic demand by importing more .
And eventually , they contend , domestic demand will weaken , forcing companies to emphasize exports again .
`` If there 's a further drive to export , '' says Nobuyuki Arai , an economist at the Japan Development Bank , `` that 'll be a problem . ''
Even in the short run , the investment boom could exacerbate a disturbing trend : Japanese exports are showing surprisingly little tendency to ease .
Japanese auto makers , for example , are increasing their production capacity in the U.S. ; the additional production should , in part , replace imported vehicles with locally manufactured ones .
But although Japanese companies increased their U.S. auto output by 42 % from January to September compared with the year-earlier period , their exports to the U.S. will drop only 9 % this year , Nikko Research Center estimates .
In contrast to previous economic booms , Japanese auto companies are n't just trying to boost production .
Many are pouring money into developing high-quality products to target affluent consumers and , to some extent , to avoid direct combat with cheaper cars from South Korea and Taiwan .
Others are replacing older facilities with flexible assembly lines on which different models can be turned out at once .
So many companies ICH are investing in high-tech machinery that Fanuc Ltd. , a robot maker , also had to build a new plant .
The buildup is `` making Japan clearly more efficient , more technologically advanced and more competitive , '' declares a Western diplomat in Tokyo .
But whatever its effects on exports and imports , Japan 's investment boom during the past two years has been stimulated at least partly by soaring domestic demand .
Japan 's marathon economy , growing at 4.3 % this year , is now in its 35th month of expansion , and some economists are betting that the boom will outlast the record 57-month expansion in the late 1960s .
Japanese consumers are increasingly eager to spend their money , especially on high-priced goods such as 29-inch television sets and luxury cars .
Nissan Motor Co. 's domestic auto sales are up 20 % this year largely because its expensive Cima , Sylvia and Cefiro models are in heavy demand .
`` One dealer told me that if he had more cars , he 'd sell them right away , '' says Takuro Endo , Nissan executive vice president .
He adds that the company is trying to keep up with demand `` by overworking '' its employees .
Similarly , Honda Motor Co. 's sales are so brisk that workers grumblethey have n't had a Saturday off in years , despite the government 's encouragement of more leisure activity .
With demand growing and workers in short supply , many Japanese manufacturers are spending heavily on automation .
Among them are the shipbuilders , which had halved their shipyard work forces to cut costs during a prolonged slump in demand but now are capturing an increased share of the strengthening global market .
Sasebo Heavy Industries Co. , a medium-sized shipbuilder , expects its sales to increase 30 % this year , largely because of rising demand for oil tankers .
Once one Japanese company steps up its investments , the whole industry follows .
Because most businesses put market share above profitability , to let a competitor 's addition to capacity go unmatched is to concede defeat .
The emphasis on market share is evident at Daikin Industries Ltd. , Japan 's biggest maker of industrial air conditioners .
Seeing new office buildings sprout up and its sales soar , Daikin is building another plant , which will lift its production capacity 50 % .
The expansion is aimed not just at meeting demand but also at expanding the company 's market share to 30 % from 27 % currently .
Besides , Daikin 's major competitors , Hitachi Ltd. and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. , `` are all adding production lines , '' a Daikin spokesman says .
`` Until now , we were trying to increase productivity with the facilitieswe already had .
But we ca n't produce enough anymore . ''
The competition is even more heated in the auto industry , where companies are racing one another in a world-wide market .
Nissan aims to expand its 25 % share of the market to 30 % by spending $ 141 million on a plant in southern Japan that could make as many as 240,000 cars a year .
Meanwhile , Toyota Motor Corp. 's $ 247 million buildup is increasing its annual capacity by 180,000 cars , and Honda is spending $ 317 million on expansion .
Mazda Motor Corp. is still considering its options , but it boldly aims to double its annual domestic sales to 800,000 cars in the next four years .
Those who are n't worried about how Japanese manufacturers ' investments will affect trade note that many new products are n't replacements for imports .
Although imports account for less than 1 % of beer sales in Japan , Asahi Breweries Ltd. , which has been gaining share with its popular dry beer , plans to fend off Japanese competitors by pouring $ 1.06 billion into facilities to brew 50 % more beer .
But new-product development will make Japanese companies stronger , and big investments in `` domestic '' industries such as beer will make it EXP even tougher for foreign competitors to crack the Japanese market .
Moreover , much of the investment boom is in high-tech fields in which Japanese companies have only limited foreign competition ; so , more investment practically assures more exports .
Toshiba Corp. , for example , is spending $ 986 million on two new plants to build four-megabit dynamic random access memories , the next generation of computer chips .
The product is n't widely used yet , but Toshiba , which has already beaten everyone else in producing the current-generation one-megabit DRAMs , believes that its early investment will heighten its chances of beating its competitors again .
`` It EXP 's important to gain leadership , '' a Toshiba spokesman says .
Meanwhile , Toshiba 's Japanese rivals , Hitachi , Fujitsu Ltd. and NEC Corp. , are n't sitting still .
After doubling production in one plant , NEC is spending $ 275 million to build another plant that , in two years , will be able to make a million four-megabit DRAMs a year .
The new chip plants `` wo n't be excessive investment , '' says Hajime Sasaki , an NEC vice president .
`` We have enough products to make and the markets to sell these products . ''
Some of Japan 's goods being produced as a result of the investment boom are already successful overseas .
Toyota 's $ 35,000 Lexus automobile , a luxury model that it started shipping to the U.S. only last month , is racking up orders at a time when U.S.-made luxury-car sales are slow .
Toyota plans to raise Lexus exports when a new plant starts up next year .
What if its sales weaken someday ?
Japanese companies have a caveat competitor attitude .
If excess capacity develops , they say , not everyone will suffer .
The losers will be those with the least attractive products , and many of them , analysts think , will be foreign companies .
If Japanese companies are so efficient , why does Kawasaki-Rikuso Transportation Co. sometimes need a week just to tell its clients how soon it can ship goods from here to Osaka ?
Why , until last spring , did the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan sometimes take several days to correct typographical errors in its paper work for international transactions ?
Because the companies have lacked office computers considered standard equipment in the U.S. and Western Europe , Japanese corporations ' reputation as hi-tech powerhouses is only half right .
Their factories may look like sets for a Spielberg movie , but their offices , with rows of clerks hunched over ledgers and abacuses , are more like scenes from a Dickens novel .
Now , the personal-computer revolution is finally reaching Japan .
Kawasaki-Rikuso , a freight company , set up its own software subsidiary this year and is spending nearly a year 's profit to more than double the computer terminals at its main office .
In April , the Long-Term Credit Bank linked its computers in Tokyo with its three American offices .
Overall , PC sales in Japan in the first half of 1989 were 34 % higher than in the year-earlier period .
Combined PC and work-station use in Japan will jump as much as 25 % annually over the next five years , according to some analysts , compared with about 10 % in the U.S. .
And with a labor shortage and intense competitive pressure to improve efficiency , more and more Japanese companies are concluding that they have no choice .
`` We have too many people in our home offices , '' says Yoshio Hatakeyama , the president of the Japan Management Association .
`` Productivity in Japanese offices is relatively low . ''
With Japanese companies in a wide range of industries -- from heavy industry to securities firms -- increasing their market share world-wide , the prospect of an even more efficient Japanese economic army may rattle foreigners .
But it also offers opportunities ; Americans are well poised to supply the weapons .
Japan may be a tough marketfor outsiders to penetrate , and the U.S. is hopelessly behind Japan in certain technologies .
But for now , at least , Americans are far better at making PCs and the software that runs them .
After years of talking about selling in Japan , more and more U.S. companies are seriously pouring in .
Apple Computer Inc. has doubled its staff here over the past year .
Lotus Development Corp. has slashed the lag between U.S. and Japan product introductions to six months from three years .
Ungermann-Bass Inc. has a bigger share of the computer-network market in Japan than at home .
But the Japanese have to go a long way to catch up .
Typical is one office of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry 's Machinery and Information Industries Bureau -- the main bureaucracy overseeing the computer industry .
`` Personal Computer '' yearbooks are lined up on nearly every desk , and dog-eared copies of Nikkei Computer crowd magazine racks .
But amid the two dozen bureaucrats and secretaries sits only one real-life PC .
While American PC sales have averaged roughly 25 % annual growth since 1984 and West European sales a whopping 40 % , Japanese sales were flat for most of that time .
Japanese office workers use PCs at half the rate of their European counterparts and one-third that of the Americans .
Moreover , Japanese offices tend to use computers less efficiently than American offices do .
In the U.S. , PCs commonly perform many tasks and plug into a broad network .
In Japan , many desktop terminals are limited to one function and ca n't communicate with other machines .
The market planning and sales promotion office of Nomura Securities Co. , for example , has more than 30 computers for its 60 workers , a respectable ratio .
But the machines are n't on employees ' desks ; they ring the perimeter of the large office .
Some machines make charts for presentations .
Others analyze the data .
To transfer information from one to the other , employees make printouts and enter the data manually .
To transmit charts to branch offices , they use a fax machine .
Meanwhile , a woman sitting next to a new Fujitsu terminal writes stock-market information on a chart with a pencil and adds it up with a hand calculator .
In an efficient setup , the same PC could perform all those tasks .
In the U.S. , more than half the PC software sold is either for spreadsheets or for database analysis , according to Lotus .
In Japan , those functions account for only about a third of the software market .
Machines dedicated solely to word processing , which have all but disappeared in the U.S. , are still more common ICH in Japan than PCs .
In the U.S. , one-fifth of the office PCs are hooked up to some sort of network .
In Japan , about 1 % are linked .
`` Computers here are used for data gathering , '' says Roger J. Boisvert , who manages the integrated-technologies group in McKinsey & Co. 's Tokyo office .
Some Japanese operations , such as securities-trading rooms , may be ahead of their American counterparts , he says , but `` basically , there 's little analysis done on computers in Japan . ''
Of course , simply buying computers does n't always solve problems , and many American companies have erred by purchasing technologythey did n't understand .
But healthy skepticism is only a small reason for Japan 's PC lag .
Various cultural and economic forces have suppressed demand .
Because the Japanese `` alphabet '' is so huge , Japan has no history of typewriter use , and so `` keyboard allergy , '' especially among older workers , remains a common affliction .
`` I have no experience before with such sophisticated machinery , '' says Matsuo Toshimitsu , a 66-year-old executive vice president of Japan Air Lines , explaining his reluctance before accepting a terminal in his office this summer .
While most American employees have their own private space , Japanese `` salarymen '' usually share large , common tables and rely heavily on old-fashioned personal contact .
Top Japanese executives often make decisions based on consensus and personal relationships rather than complex financial projections and fancy presentations .
And Japan 's management system makes it EXP hard to impose a single , integrated computer system corporatewide .
Besides , a computer processing the Japanese language needs a huge memory and much processing capability , while the screen and printer need far better definition to depict accurately the intricate symbols .
Until recently , much of the necessary technology has been unavailable or at least unaffordable .
Some analysts estimatethe average PC costs about 50 % more ICH in Japan than the U.S. .
But the complex language is n't the only reason .
For the past decade , NEC Corp. has owned more than half the Japanese PC market and ruled it with near-monopoly power .
With little competition , the computer industry here is inefficient .
The U.S. market , too , is dominated by a giant , International Business Machines Corp .
But early on , IBM offered its basic design to anybody wanting to copy it .
Dozens of small companies did , swiftly establishing a standard operating system .
That spurs competition and growth , allows users to change and mix brands easily , and increases software firms ' incentive to write packages because they can be sold to users of virtually any computer .
If a record industry lacked a common standard , Sony CD owners could listen to a Sony version of Madonna 's `` Like a Prayer '' but not one made for a Panasonic player .
That is the state of Japan 's computer industry .
NEC wo n't release its code , and every one of the dozen or so makers has its own proprietary operating system -- all incompatible with each other .
IBM established its standard to try to stop falling behind upstart Apple Computer , but NEC was ahead from the start and did n't need to invite in competitive allies .
Meanwhile , the big players have n't tried to copy the NEC standard .
Corporate pride as well as the close ties common among Japanese manufacturers help explain why .
Most rivals `` have a working relationship with NEC , often through cross-licensing of technology , '' the Japan Personal Computer Software Association noted recently .
`` They hesitate to market NEC-compatible machines ; NEC disapproves of such machines , and marketing one would jeopardize their relationship . ''
The result , according to many analysts , is higher prices and less innovation .
While tens of thousands of software packages using the IBM standard are available in the U.S. , they sayonly about 8,000 are written for NEC .
A year ago , Japan 's Fair Trade Commission warned NEC about possible violations of anti-monopoly laws for discouraging retailers from discounting .
In Japan , `` software is four to five years behind the U.S. because hardware is four to five years behind , because NEC is enjoying a monopoly , '' complains Kazuhiko Nishi , the president of Ascii Corp. , one of Japan 's leading PC-magazine publishing and software companies .
`` There are no price wars , no competition . ''
An NEC spokeswoman responds that prices are higher in Japan because customers put a greater emphasis ICH on quality and service than they do in the U.S. .
She adds that some technological advances trail those in the U.S. because the Japanese still import basic operating systems from American companies .
But the market is changing .
The government is funding several projects to push PC use .
Over the next three years , public schools will get 1.5 million PCs , a 15-fold increase from current levels .
In the private sector , practically every major company is setting explicit goals to increase employees ' exposure to computers .
Toyota Motor Corp. 's sales offices in Japan have one-tenth the computers per employee that its own U.S. offices do ; over the next five years , it is aiming for rough parity .
Within a year , Kao Corp. , a major cosmetics company , plans to eliminate 1,000 clerical jobs by putting on a central computer network some work , such as credit reports , currently performed in 22 separate offices .
By increasing the number of PCsit uses from 66 to 1,000 , Omron Tateishi Electronics Co. , of Kyoto , hopes not only to make certain tasks easier but also to transform the waythe company is run .
`` Managers have long been those who supervise their subordinates so orders would be properly acted on , '' a spokesman says .
`` But new managers will have to be creators and innovators ... and for that purpose it EXP is necessary to create an environment where information from both inside and outside the company can be reached easily , and also shared . ''
Meanwhile , more computer makers now are competing for the new business .
Seiko Epson Corp. , a newcomer to the industry , fought off a legal challenge and started selling NEC clones last year .
It has won about 15 % of the retail PC market .
Sony Corp. , which temporarily dropped out of the PC business three years ago , started selling its work station in 1987 and quickly became the leading Japanese company in that market .
In a country where elbow room is scarce , laptop machines will take a large portion of the industry 's future growth .
Toshiba Corp. busted open that sector this summer with a notebook-sized machine that retails for less than 200,000 yen -LRB- under $ 1,500 -RRB- -- one of the smallest , cheapest PCs available in the country .
Fujitsu Ltd. is lavishing the most expensive promotion campaign in its history -- including a 100,000-guest bash at Tokyo Dome -- for its sophisticated sound\/graphics FM Towns machine , which it advertises for everything from balancing the family checkbook to practicing karaoke , bar singing .
Many of the companies are even dropping their traditional independence and trying to band together to create some sort of standard .
Two years ago , most of the smaller makers joined under the Microsoft Corp. umbrella to adopt a version of the American IBM AT standard .
That has n't generated much sales , but this summer Microsoft rallied all the major NEC competitors to make their new machines compatible with the IBM OS\/2 standard .
A healthy , coherent Japanese market could also make it EXP far easier for Japanese companies to sell overseas , where their share is still minimal .
But it could also help American companies , which also are starting to try to open the market .
As with many other goods , the American share of Japan 's PC market is far below that in the rest of the world .
U.S. makers have under 10 % share , compared with half the market in Europe and 80 % at home .
Though no formal trade barriers exist , the Japanese computer industry is difficultfor outsiders to enter .
`` If it were an open market , we would have been in in 1983 or 1984 , '' says Eckhard Pfeiffer , who heads Compaq Computer Corp. 's European and international operations .
His company , without any major effort , sells more machines in China than in Japan .
Although it has opened a New Zealand subsidiary , it is still only `` studying '' Japan , the only nation that has n't adopted IBM-oriented specifications .
And because general retail centers such as ComputerLand have little presence in Japan , sales remain in the iron grip of established computer makers .
But the Americans are also to blame .
They long made little effort here .
IBM , though long a leader in the Japanese mainframe business , did n't introduce its first PC in Japan until five years after NEC did , and that was n't compatible even with the U.S. IBM standard .
Apple did n't introduce a kanji machine -- one that handles the Chinese characters of written Japanese -- until three years after entering the market .
Critics also sayAmerican companies charge too much .
Japan 's FTC saysit is investigating Apple for allegedly discouraging retailers from discounting .
But the U.S. companies are redoubling their efforts .
Apple recently hired its first Japanese president ICH , luring away an official of Toshiba 's European operations , as well as a whole Japanese top-management team .
Earlier this year , it introduced a much more powerful kanji operating system and a kanji laser printer .
IBM just last year started selling its first machine that could run in both Japanese and English and that substantially enhances compatibility with its American products .
`` It EXP may take five years to break even in Japan , '' says John A. Siniscal , who runs the Asia-Pacific office for McCormack & Dodge , a U.S. software company .
`` But it 's an enormous business opportunity .
Ralph Brown was 31,000 feet over Minnesota when both jets on his Falcon 20 flamed out .
At 18,000 feet , he says , he and his co-pilot `` were looking for an interstate or a cornfield '' to land .
At 13,000 feet , the engines restarted .
But knowing that mechanics would probably ground him for repairs , Mr. Brown skipped his stop in nearby Chicago and set course to get his load -- a few hundred parcels -- to the Memphis package-sorting hub on time .
Had he been a little less gung-ho , `` I 'd have gotten the thing on the ground and headed for the nearest bar , '' Mr. Brown says .
But he flies for Federal Express Corp. , perhaps the closest thing in corporate America to the Green Berets .
Federal 's employees work long hours and seem to thrive on the stress of racing the clock .
Like Mr. Brown , they sometimes go to surprising lengths to meet that overarching corporate goal : delivering the goods on time .
That may soon change .
This month , Federal 's 2,048 pilots , including some 961 acquired along with Tiger International Inc. in February , will decide whether to elect the powerful Air Line Pilots Association as their bargaining agent .
The election , which would bring the first major union to Federal 's U.S. operations , has pitted new hires against devoted veterans such as Mr. Brown .
It has also rattled Federal 's strongly anti-union management , which is already contending with melding far-flung operations and with falling profits .
`` A union , sooner or later , has to have an adversary , and it has to have a victory , '' Frederick W. Smith , Federal 's chairman and chief executive , says with disdain .
`` In our formula , we do n't have any losers except the competition . ''
What managers really fear is that the pro-union movement could spread beyond the pilots .
Under federal transportation law , a government mediator is attempting to reconcile the melding of Tiger 's job classifications into Federal 's .
Depending on the outcome , the merged company may face union elections ICH this fall among airplane mechanics , ramp workers , stock clerks and flight dispatchers .
These groups constitute up to 10 % of its work force .
`` Unions would have a profound effect on the whole culture of the company , '' says Bernard La Londe , a professor at Ohio State University at Columbus and a Federal consultant .
That culture , carefully crafted by Mr. Smith , leaves little , if any , room for unions .
Since founding the company , the charismatic Vietnam vet , who is still only 46 years old , has fostered an ethos of combat .
Flights are `` missions . ''
Mr. Smith 's managers have , at times , been called `` Ho Chi Minh 's Guerrillas . ''
The Bravo Zulu award , the Navy accolade for a `` job well done , '' is bestowed on Federal 's workers who surpass the call of duty .
Competitors are known as the `` enemy . ''
To reinforce employees ' dedication , Mr. Smith pays well .
He also lets workers vent steam through an elaborate grievance procedure and , as a perk , fly free in empty cockpit seats .
He gives pep talks in periodic `` family briefings '' beamed internationally on `` FXTV , '' the company 's own television network .
And , with many of his 70,000 workers , Mr. Smith 's damn-the-torpedoes attitude has caught on .
James Cleveland , a courier who earned a Bravo Zulu for figuring out how to get a major customer 's 1,100-parcel-a-week load to its doorstep by 8 a.m. , considers himself far more than a courier .
`` We do n't just hand the customer the package .
That 's just the beginning , '' he says .
`` In essence , we run the show . ''
David Sanders , a longtime pilot , bristles at the mere suggestion that a union might tamper with his flight schedule .
`` This is America , '' he says .
`` Nobody has the right to tell me how much I can work . ''
Such attitudes have given Federal flexibility , not only to rapidly implement new technology but to keep its work force extraordinarily lean .
The company deliberately understaffs , stretching employees ' schedules to the limit .
But though couriers work as many as 60 hours a week during the autumn rush , they leave early during slack times while still being assured of a minimum paycheck .
Pilots , as well , routinely fly overtime to ensure that none are furloughed during seasonal lows .
The operational freedom has also given Federal a leg up on archrival United Parcel Service Inc. , the nation 's largest employer of United Brotherhood of Teamsters members .
UPS wo n't discuss its labor practices , but , according to Mr. Cleveland , a former UPS employee , and others , union work rules prohibit UPS drivers from doing more than carrying packages between customers and their vans .
Because UPS drivers are n't permitted to load their own vehicles at the depot , say these couriers , packages often get buried in the load and are delivered late .
Labor problems are the last thingMr. Smith needs right now .
Although the Tiger acquisition has brought Federal a long way toward becoming the global playerit wants to be , it also has brought problems .
It more than doubled Federal 's long-term debt to $ 1.9 billion , thrust the company into unknown territory -- heavy cargo -- and suddenly expanded its landing rights to 21 countries from four .
Federal , on its own , had n't been doing very well overseas .
It had hemorrhaged in its attempt to get into Asia , where treaty restrictions forced it to fly some planes half-empty on certain routes .
On routes to South America , the company had no backup jets to ensure delivery when planes were grounded .
In Europe , business suffered as Federal bought several local companies , only to have the managers quit .
These and other problems squeezed Federal 's profit margins last year to 8 % , down from more than 13 % annually in the first half of the decade .
Earnings have plummeted , too , in each of the past three quarters .
In the fiscal first period ended Aug. 31 , profit fell 54 % to $ 30.4 million , or 58 cents a share , mostly because of the Tiger merger , Federal says .
Federal 's stock price , however , has held up well , driven in part by the general run-up of airline stocks , analysts say .
Since trading as low as $ 42.25 a share in May , Federal 's shares have rallied as high as $ 57.87 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading .
They closed Friday at $ 53.25 , down 50 cents on the day .
There 's a certain irony in the fact that Federal Express faces its first union problems as a result of its Tiger purchase .
Tiger itself was founded by a band of gungho airmen who had airlifted supplies `` over the Hump '' from India to China during World War II .
In the early 1970s , Mr. Smith modeled his fledgling company on Tiger 's innovation of hub-and-spoke and containerized-cargo operations .
But from early on , Tiger 's workers unionized , while Federal 's never have .
Federal Express officials acknowledge mistakes in their drive overseas but sayit will pay off eventually .
Analysts expect Federal 's earnings to improve again in its fiscal third quarter ending Feb. 28 , when the company should begin benefiting from Tiger 's extra flights , back-up planes and landing rights .
Until then , they expect the cost of integrating the two carriers to continue crimping profits .
For now , the union issue is the most nettlesome of Federal 's Tiger problems , management believes .
Although encouraging dialogue between managers and workers , Mr. Smith does n't countenance what he considers insubordination .
When a large group of pilots once signed petitions opposing work-rule and compensation changes , he called a meeting in a company hangar and dressed them down for challenging his authority .
He then made most of the changes , pilots say .
That sort of approach , however , has n't worked since the addition of Tiger .
Its 6,500 workers , who had battled Tiger 's management for years over givebacks , were union members until the day of the merger , when most of their unions were automatically decertified .
Soon after the merger , moreover , Federal 's management asked Tiger 's pilots to sign an agreement stating that they could be fired any time , without cause or notice .
When the pilots refused , the company retracted it .
Mr. Smith angered Federal 's pilots , too .
In his haste to seal the deal with Tiger Chairman Saul Steinberg last August , Mr. Smith ignored a promise ICH that he had made to his own pilots three years ago : that any fliers acquired in future mergers would be `` end-tailed '' -- put at the bottom of the pilot seniority list that determines work schedules , pay and career options .
The Tiger merger agreement stipulated that the lists be combined on the basis of tenure .
Mr. Smith is trying hard to allay the anger .
And even some pro-union pilots sayhis charisma and popularity among the many former military fliers could be tough to beat .
`` A lot of people are identifying a vote for representation as a vote against Fred Smith , '' says J.X. Gollich , a Tiger-turned-Federal pilot and union activist .
Mr. Smith and other top Federal executives have met with Tiger workers in Los Angeles , Ohio , New York , Alaska , Asia and Europe .
Recently , they have appeared every few weeks in talk-show type videos , countering pro-union arguments .
In one video , Mr. Smith defended his agreement to merge the pilot-seniority lists .
He saidMr. Steinberg had insisted that the merger talks move quickly .
Regulators , as well , might have quashed the deal if Tiger 's pilots had n't been protected , he said .
Furthermore , Mr. Smith added , `` our contract with our pilots says that we will manage our fleet operations with their advice .
It does n't give any particular group the ability to veto change . ''
Already , the fight has been costly .
The seniority-list controversy , along with the job-classification dispute , has been turned over to the mediator .
Meanwhile , the company is operating with two separate pilot groups and seniority lists , and that is costing Federal `` a big number , '' says James Barksdale , executive vice president and chief operating officer .
The issue has also cost Federal management a lot of good will among its old pilots .
`` They were willing to mistreat us because we had n't shown any moxie , any resistance , '' says William Queenan , a DC-10 pilot and 14-year Federal veteran .
Adds ICH John Poag , a 727 captain and past chairman of the company-sponsored Flight Advisory Board : `` They 've made all these magnanimous gestures to the Flying Tiger pilots , and for us , nothing . ''
Such animosity could prove pivotal in the union vote .
A large majority of the 961 former Tiger fliers support the union , according to a union study .
But though most of the 1,087 Federal pilots are believed opposed , it EXP is unclear just how much their loyalty to Mr. Smith has been eroded .
The fight has turned ugly and , among pilots at least , has shattered the esprit de corps that Mr. Smith worked so hard to build .
Anti-union pilots have held ballot-burning parties .
Some younger pilots saythey have had to endure anti-union harangues by senior pilots while flying across the country .
And for now , at least , the competition is n't the only enemy .
Barney Barnhardt , a 727 captain and leader of the pro-union forces , saidhe has received two anonymous death threats and been challenged to a fight with tire irons by a colleague .
`` The pilots are either for us or extremely against us , '' he says with a sigh .
Nobody knows why our early ancestors decided to get off their knuckles and stand upright .
Maybe they just wanted a better view of the stars .
And when sky gazers finally realized that the heavenly lights were not the footprints of the gods , but rather millions of blazing stars like our Sun writ far , they began to wonder , How do we get there ?
How can we leave this world and travel , not merely the 238,000 miles to the Moon , or 35 million miles to Mars , but through the vast dark silk of interstellar space , across trillions and trillions of miles , to encounter other stars , other solar systems , even other civilizations ?
According to a group of scientists for whom the term '' wildly optimistic dreamers '' is virtually a job description , it will indeed be very difficult to travel to other stars , and nobody in either the public or private sector is about to try it any time soon .
But as the researchers see it , the challenge is not insurmountable , it requires no defiance of the laws of physics , so why not have fun and start thinking about it now ?
At the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , held last month in Boston , scientists discussed how humans might pull off a real-life version of '' Star Trek , '' minus the space Lycra and perpetual syndication rights .
They talked about propulsion at a reasonable fraction of the speed of light , a velocity that is orders of magnitude greater than any space ship can fly today , but that would be necessary if the light-years of space between the Sun and even the nearest star are ever to be crossed .
They talked about the possibility of multigenerational space travel , and what it might be like for people who board a space ship knowing that they , their children , grandchildren and descendants through 6 , 8 or 10 generations would live and die knowing nothing but life in an enclosed and entirely artificial environment , hurtling year upon year through the near-featureless expanse of interstellar space .
They talked about how big the founding crew would have to be to prevent long-term risks of inbreeding and so-called genetic drift .
They talked about how the crew 's chain of command would be structured , what language people would most likely speak , and what sort of marital and family policies might be put in place .
And they talked about food , all of which would have to be grown , cultivated and synthesized on board .
'' One thing is almost certain , '' said Dr. Jean B. Hunter , an associate professor of biological and environmental engineering at Cornell .
'' You 'll have to leave the steak , cheesecake and artichokes with hollandaise sauce behind . ''
Many of the subjects raised during the session were so fanciful that at times it felt like a discussion of how to clone a unicorn , and indeed half the presenters moonlight as science fiction writers .
Nevertheless , the researchers argued , human beings have shown themselves to be implacable itinerants , capable of colonizing the most hostile environments .
Dr. John H. Moore , a research professor of anthropology at the University of Florida , compared a theoretical crew of spacefaring pioneers to groups of Polynesians setting out tens of thousands of years ago in search of new islands to populate .
'' Young people with food and tools would set out in large flotillas of canoes , '' he said .
'' Nobody knew if they would ever come back , the trade winds went in only one direction , and many of them perished in the ocean . ''
Yet over time , the Polynesians managed to colonize New Zealand , Easter Island and Hawaii .
Still , no human migration in history would compare in difficulty with reaching another star .
The nearest , Alpha Centauri , is about 4.4 light-years from the Sun , and a light-year is equal to almost six trillion miles .
The next nearest star , Sirius , is 8.7 light-years from home .
To give a graphic sense of what these distances mean , Dr. Geoffrey A. Landis of the NASA John Glenn Research Center in Cleveland , pointed out that the fastest objects humans have ever dispatched into space are the Voyager interplanetary probes , which travel at about 9.3 miles per second .
'' If a caveman had launched one of those during the last ice age , 11,000 years ago , '' Dr. Landis said , '' it would now be only a fifth of the way toward the nearest star . ''
Dr. Robert L. Forward , owner and chief scientist of Forward Unlimited , a consulting company that describes itself as '' specializing in exotic physics and advanced space propulsion , '' argued that rockets and their fuel would be so heavy that they would prevent a starship from reaching the necessary velocity to go anywhere in a sane amount of time .
He envisions a rocketless spacecraft that would be manufactured in space and equipped with an ultrathin , ultralarge sail , its span as big as Texas but using no more material than a small bridge .
A beam of laser light or high-energy particles from a source on Earth , in space or perhaps on the Sun-drenched planet of Mercury would be aimed at the sail , propelling it and its attached module to as much as 30 percent the speed of light -- or about 55,000 miles per second .
At that pace , said Dr. Forward , a crew would reach Alpha Centauri in under 50 years .
'' You could get a bunch of 16-year-olds , train them and then send them out at the age of 20 , '' he said .
'' They 'd have a long , boring trip , reach Alpha Centauri when they 're in their 60 's or 70 's , do some exploring , and send everything they learned back home . ''
Admittedly , the astronauts would not make it home themselves .
'' It 's a lifetime job , '' Dr. Forward said .
'' But it could be done in a single generation . ''
For longer journeys , designed with multigenerational crews in mind , an onboard engine and fuel source would be required , perhaps something powered by nuclear bombs , or the combining of matter and antimatter in a reaction that converts both substances into pure energy .
However the ship is propulsed , the researchers agree that it must be comfortable for long-distance travel .
That means creating artificial gravity by gently rotating the craft ; a spin no greater than one or two revolutions per minute would suffice .
It might also mean calling upon architects with Disney-esque sensibilities .
'' The inside of one of these long-duration space habitats might feel like the inside of a shopping mall , '' Dr. Landis said .
'' Malls are carefully designed to use space efficiently , yet to give you the feeling that they 're more spacious than they are . ''
And malls , of course , are a great place to bring the family .
In Dr. Moore 's view , the good old-fashioned family is the key to success in space .
'' Over the past several decades , space scientists and writers of science fiction have speculated at length about the optimum size and composition '' of an interstellar crew , he said .
They have imagined platoons of Chuck Yeager-type stalwarts grimly enduring all hardships , or teams of bionic and vaguely asexual crew members overseeing freezers of embryos that can be defrosted and gestated as needed .
'' Some of the scenarios proposed so far are downright alarming from a social science perspective , '' Dr. Moore said , '' since they require bizarre social structures and an intensity of social relationships which are quite beyond the experience of any known human communities . ''
In deciding how to organize a star mission , Dr. Moore looks to the most '' familiar , ubiquitous , well-ordered and well-understood '' of social forms , the human family .
'' Virtually every human society in history has been structured along kinship lines , '' he said , '' from small-scale foraging societies to empires comprising millions of people . ''
Lines of authority and seniority in a family are reasonably clear , and when they 're not , well , there 's always the time-out chamber .
In Dr. Moore 's rendition , all recruits for an interstellar odyssey would be guaranteed the opportunity , though not the requirement , to marry and have children .
Mate choice would be part of the bargain as well , with the population cannily structured so that each cohort of individuals , on reaching sexual maturity , would have about 10 potential partners of a similar age to select from .
Dr. Moore and his colleagues have developed a computer simulation called Ethnopop , in which they asked how large the crew must be in order to maintain genetic variability over time while still allowing crew members a choice of sex partners .
They determined that a founding crew could be as small as 80 to 100 people and stay viable for more than a thousand years , assuming that two rules were followed : women waited until they were in their mid-30 's or so before having children , and they had only a couple each .
Counterintuitive though it may seem , said Dr. Moore , delayed childbearing and small families are known to help maintain genetic variability in a closed population .
Genetic diversity may be essential , but Dr. Sarah G. Thomason , a professor of linguistics at the University of Michigan , argued that the same could not be said for language .
'' You want everyone to be able to talk to each other as soon as they 're on board , '' she said .
As Dr. Thomason sees it , the likeliest lingua franca for a starship will be -- gracias a Dios -- English .
After all , she said , English is the language of the international air traffic control system , the scientific community and the educated class generally .
English is the official language of 51 of the 195 nations of the world , and it is the second language of many others .
Yet , while crew members will be expected to speak English , their accents are likely to be quite diverse , and the English that their children and grandchildren end up speaking will have a rhythm and texture of its own -- Space English .
And though Dr. Thomason believes that the basic structure of Space English is not likely to change much from that of the mother tongue , teenagers will , of course , invent words of their own and drop words of scant use .
'' I can imagine the loss of words like snow , rivers , winter , mosquitoes , if they 're lucky , '' she said .
Another arena that will test the limits of human ingenuity is space cuisine .
Without livestock on board or supply ships to restock the pantry , crew members will have to be entirely self-sufficient .
Dr. Hunter of Cornell envisions crops grown in hydroponic gardens , in which plants are suspended in troughs like rain gutters , and water and fertilizer are trickled slowly over their roots .
Among the possible food groups are wheat , rice , sweet potatoes , beans , soy , corn , herbs and spices .
In addition , space-minded agronomists are exploring the marvels of microbes .
Plants take weeks to grow , but yeastlike micro-organisms replicating in vats can be used to churn out significant quantities of carbohydrates , sugars , proteins and fats in a matter of hours .
Of benefit to a community in which recycling is not just a personal virtue but a public necessity , micro-organisms can live on the carboniferous waste products of plants and people .
'' There 's a protein product called quorn , which is made from filamentous mold , '' Dr. Hunter said .
'' Not to make a joke of it , but it does taste like chicken . ''
Some clich  s , it seems , are truly universal .
Correction : March 9 , 2002 , Saturday An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the challenges of interstellar travel referred imprecisely to the stars nearest Earth 's .
While Alpha Centauri is the nearest star system , it has three stars ; the nearest is Proxima Centauri , 4.2 light-years away .
The next nearest is Barnard 's star , at 6 light-years -- not the double star Sirius , 8.7 light-years away .
In recent years , scientists have made sizable gains in what was once considered an impossible art -- reconstructing the history of Earth 's atmosphere back into the dim past .
They can now peer across more than a half billion years .
The scientists have learned about the changing makeup of the vanished gases by teasing subtle clues from fossilized soils , plants and sea creatures .
They have also gained insights from computer models that predict how phenomena like eroding rocks and erupting volcanoes have altered the planet 's evolving air .
'' It 's getting a lot more attention , '' Michael C. MacCracken , chief scientist of the Climate Institute , a research group in Washington , said of the growing field .
For the first time , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , a United Nations group that analyzes global warming , plans to include a chapter on the reconstructions in its latest report , due early next year .
The discoveries have stirred a little-known dispute that , if resolved , could have major implications .
At issue is whether the findings back or undermine the prevailing view on global warming .
One side foresees a looming crisis of planetary heating ; the other , temperature increases that would be more nuisance than catastrophe .
Perhaps surprisingly , both hail from the same camp : scientists who study the big picture of Earth 's past , including geologists and paleoclimatologists .
Most public discussions of global warming concentrate on evidence from the last few hundred or , at most , few thousand years .
And some climate scientists remain unconvinced that data from the deep past are solid enough to be relevant to the debates .
But the experts who peer back millions of years , though they may debate what their work means , do agree on the relevance of their findings .
They also agree that the eon known as the Phanerozoic , a lengthy span from the present to 550 million years ago , the dawn of complex life , typically bore concentrations of carbon dioxide that were up to 18 times the levels present in the short reign of Homo sapiens .
The carbon dioxide , the scientists agree , came from volcanoes and other natural sources , as on Mars and Venus .
The levels have generally dropped over the ages , as the carbon became a building block of many rock formations and all living things .
Moreover , the opponents tend to agree on why the early Earth 's high carbon dioxide levels failed to roast the planet .
First , the Sun was dimmer in its youth .
Second , as the gas concentrations increase , its heat trapping capacity slows and reaches a plateau .
Where the specialists clash is on what the evidence means for the idea that industrial civilization and the burning of fossil fuels are the main culprits in climate change .
The two sides agree that carbon dioxide can block solar energy that would otherwise radiate back into space , an effect known as greenhouse warming .
But they differ sharply on its strength .
Some argue that CO2 fluctuations over the Phanerozoic follow climate trends fairly well , supporting a causal relationship between high gas levels and high temperatures .
'' The geologic record over the past 550 million years indicates a good correlation , '' said Robert A. Berner , a Yale geologist and pioneer of paleoclimate analysis .
'' There are other factors at work here .
But in general , global warming is due to CO2 .
It was in the past and is now . ''
Other experts say that is an oversimplification of a complex picture of natural variation .
The fluctuations in the gas levels , they say , often fall out of step with the planet 's hot and cold cycles , undermining the claimed supremacy of carbon dioxide .
'' It 's too simplistic to say low CO2 was the only cause of the glacial periods '' on time scales of millions of years , said Robert Giegengack , a geologist at the University of Pennsylvania who studies past atmospheres .
'' The record violates that one-to-one correspondence . ''
He and other doubters say the planet is clearly warming today , as it has repeatedly done , but insist that no one knows exactly why .
Other possible causes , they say , include changes in sea currents , Sun cycles and cosmic rays that bombard the planet .
'' More and more data , '' Jan Veizer , an expert on Phanerozoic climates at the University of Ottawa , said , '' point to the Sun and stars as the dominant driver . ''
Highlighting the gap , the two sides clash on how much the Earth would warm today if carbon dioxide concentrations double from preindustrial levels , as scientists expect .
Many climatologists see an increase of as much as 8 degrees Fahrenheit .
The skeptics , drawing on Phanerozoic data , tend to see far less , perhaps 2 or 3 degrees .
In the Phanerozoic -LRB- the term is Greek for visible life -RRB- , complex organisms arose .
If its countless ages were compressed into a single year , fish would have appeared in January , land animals in March , dinosaurs in June , monkeys in December and humans late on New Year 's Eve .
The Phanerozoic dispute , fought mainly in scholarly journals and scientific meetings , has occurred in isolation from the public debate on global warming .
Al Gore in '' An Inconvenient Truth '' makes no mention of it .
Some mainstream scientists familiar with the Phanerozoic evidence call it too sketchy for public consumption and government policy , if not expert deliberations .
'' In my view , the uncertainties are too great to draw any conclusions right now , '' Michael Oppenheimer , a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton , said .
'' It could be that when the dust settles some insight will emerge that will be germane to the current problem -- how do we keep the climate from spinning out of control . ''
Skeptics say CO2 crusaders simply find the Phanerozoic data embarrassing and irreconcilable with public alarms .
'' People come to me and say , ` Stop talking like this , you 're hurting the cause , ' '' said Dr. Giegengack of Penn. .
Robert A. Rohde , a graduate student in geophysics at the University of California , Berkeley , may represent a neutral voice .
The evidence , he said , '' is that CO2 is just one of many influences . ''
For Wikipedia , Mr. Rohde recently drew up graphic overviews of Phanerozoic carbon dioxide , en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/Image:Phanerozoic-Carbon-Dioxide.png , and climate swings , en.wikipedia.org\/wiki\/Image:Phanerozoic-Climate-Change.png .
For nearly two centuries , scientists have known that the ancient Earth went through ice ages and other climate upheavals .
Their explanations included changes in land forms , ocean flows , solar intensity and Earth 's orbit around the Sun .
The new argument dates from 1958 , when scientists began to track carbon dioxide in the air , finding its levels low , 0.0315 percent , but increasing .
They knew that excess gas could in theory trap more heat from the Sun , warming the planet and providing a new explanation for climate change .
The greenhouse theory rose to prominence in the 1980 's as carbon dioxide continued to increase and as global temperatures started to increase .
While scientists tracked many greenhouse gases , including ozone , methane and water vapor , they focused on carbon dioxide because its concentrations seemed to be rising quite rapidly .
Keen to put the threat in perspective , they sought to compare modern CO2 levels to those of the past .
Ice cores from the frozen regions turned out to harbor tiny air bubbles that showed carbon dioxide concentrations going back hundreds of thousands of years .
Scientists found the preindustrial levels averaging 280 parts per million , down from 315 parts per million , or 0.0315 percent , in 1958 .
Scientists suspected that the concentrations were once much higher , especially in hot eras of little or no polar ice .
Eager to push beyond the cores , which went back just a half million years or so , scientists looked for ways to peer further back .
Dr. Berner of Yale focused on computer models .
His studies of the Phanerozoic analyzed factors such as how some ages produced many volcanoes and much atmospheric carbon dioxide and others spawned mountains , extensive weathering of fresh rock and , by that mechanism , considerable uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide .
From the start , he consistently reported close ties between carbon dioxide and climate swings .
For instance , in the explosion of plant life from 400 million to 300 million years ago , he found a sharp drop in the gas , occurring as the earth entered an ice age .
'' These results , '' Dr. Berner wrote in the journal Science in 1990 , '' support the notion that the atmospheric CO2 greenhouse mechanism is a major control on climate over very long time scales . ''
Other scientists looked for clues among fossilized soils , plants and sea creatures , assuming that fluctuating climates had altered their growth patterns .
In time , the ancient specimens yielded a bonanza of subtle evidence , some confirming aspects of Dr. Berner 's modeling .
Claudia I. Mora and two colleagues at the University of Tennessee found that ancient soils verified the steep decline in carbon dioxide between 400 million and 300 million years ago .
Other scientists found conflicting evidence .
In 1992 , a team from the University of New Mexico reported that ancient soils showed extremely high levels of carbon dioxide 440 million years ago , an age of primitive sea life before the advent of land plants and animals .
The carbon dioxide levels were roughly 16 times higher than today .
Surprisingly , the scientists said , this appeared to coincide with wide glaciation , an analysis , wrote Crayton J. Yapp and Harald Poths in the journal Nature , that '' suggests that the climate models require modification . ''
Throughout the 1990 's , reconstruction papers offered evidence on both sides of the debate about the effects of carbon dioxide .
Starting in 2000 , the attacks intensified as Dr. Veizer of Ottawa questioned the CO2-climate link across the whole Phanerozoic .
He and two Belgian colleagues , writing in Nature , based their doubts on how two ice ages -- 440 million and 150 million years ago , in the age of dinosaurs -- apparently had very high carbon dioxide levels .
In 2002 , Daniel H. Rothman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology also raised sharp Phanerozoic questions after studying carbon dioxide clues teased from marine rocks .
Writing in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , he said that with one exception -- the recent cool period of the last 50 million years -- he could find '' no systematic correspondence '' between carbon dioxide and climate shifts .
In 2003 , Dr. Veizer joined Nir J. Shaviv , an astrophysicist at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem , to propose a new climate driver .
They envisioned slow movements of the solar system through the surrounding galaxy as controlling the cosmic rays that bombard Earth 's atmosphere .
The reverse would cause cooling .
The Phanerozoic record of cosmic-ray bombardment showed excellent agreement with climate fluctuations , trumping carbon dioxide , they wrote .
In 2004 , Dr. Berner of Yale and four colleagues fired back .
While saying cosmic rays were possibly '' of some climatic significance , '' they argued that such an effect was much less than that of carbon dioxide .
In the debate , opponents can differ not only on the contours of past CO2 fluctuations but also on defining hot and cold eras .
Although Dr. Veizer sees a cold period 150 million years ago , a time of increased ice at sea but not on land because the continents had shifted from the poles , Dr. Berner , in his modeling , disregards it .
Such differences can muddy the dispute .
Today , each side claims new victories .
Dr. Berner recently refined his model to repair an old inconsistency .
The revision , described in the May issue of The American Journal of Science , brings the model into closer agreement with the fact of wide glaciation 440 million years ago , yielding what he sees as stronger evidence of the dominant role of carbon dioxide then .
Dr. Yapp , once a carbon dioxide skeptic , concurred , saying , '' The data complied in the last decade suggests that long-term climate change correlates pretty well with CO2 changes . ''
Some climatologists view the Phanerozoic debate as irrelevant .
They say the evidence of a tie between carbon dioxide and planetary warming over the last few centuries is so compelling that any long-term evidence to the contrary must somehow be tainted .
They also say greenhouse gases are increasing faster than at any other time in Earth history , making the past immaterial .
Carbon dioxide skeptics and others see the reconstructions of the last 15 years as increasingly reliable , posing fundamental questions about the claimed powers of carbon dioxide .
Climatologists and policy makers , they say , need to ponder such complexities rather than trying to ignore or dismiss the unexpected findings .
'' Some of the work has been quite meticulous , '' Thure E. Cerling , an expert at the University of Utah on Phanerozoic climates , said .
'' We are likely to learn something . ''
When Anya Bailey developed an eating disorder after her 12th birthday , her mother took her to a psychiatrist at the University of Minnesota who prescribed a powerful antipsychotic drug called Risperdal .
Created for schizophrenia , Risperdal is not approved to treat eating disorders , but increased appetite is a common side effect and doctors may prescribe drugs as they see fit .
Anya gained weight but within two years developed a crippling knot in her back .
She now receives regular injections of Botox to unclench her back muscles .
She often awakens crying in pain .
Isabella Bailey , Anya 's mother , said she had no idea that children might be especially susceptible to Risperdal 's side effects .
Nor did she know that Risperdal and similar medicines were not approved at the time to treat children , or that medical trials often cited to justify the use of such drugs had as few as eight children taking the drug by the end .
Just as surprising , Ms. Bailey said , was learning that the university psychiatrist who supervised Anya 's care received more than $ 7,000 from 2003 to 2004 from Johnson & Johnson , Risperdal 's maker , in return for lectures about one of the company 's drugs .
Doctors , including Anya Bailey 's , maintain that payments from drug companies do not influence what they prescribe for patients .
But the intersection of money and medicine , and its effect on the well-being of patients , has become one of the most contentious issues in health care .
Nowhere is that more true than in psychiatry , where increasing payments to doctors have coincided with the growing use in children of a relatively new class of drugs known as atypical antipsychotics .
These best-selling drugs , including Risperdal , Seroquel , Zyprexa , Abilify and Geodon , are now being prescribed to more than half a million children in the United States to help parents deal with behavior problems despite profound risks and almost no approved uses for minors .
A New York Times analysis of records in Minnesota , the only state that requires public reports of all drug company marketing payments to doctors , provides rare documentation of how financial relationships between doctors and drug makers correspond to the growing use of atypicals in children .
From 2000 to 2005 , drug maker payments to Minnesota psychiatrists rose more than sixfold , to $ 1.6 million .
During those same years , prescriptions of antipsychotics for children in Minnesota 's Medicaid program rose more than ninefold .
Those who took the most money from makers of atypicals tended to prescribe the drugs to children the most often , the data suggest .
On average , Minnesota psychiatrists who received at least $ 5,000 from atypical makers from 2000 to 2005 appear to have written three times as many atypical prescriptions for children as psychiatrists who received less or no money .
The Times analysis focused on prescriptions written for about one-third of Minnesota 's Medicaid population , almost all of whom are disabled .
Some doctors were misidentified by pharmacists , but the information provides a rough guide to prescribing patterns in the state .
Drug makers underwrite decision makers at every level of care .
They pay doctors who prescribe and recommend drugs , teach about the underlying diseases , perform studies and write guidelines that other doctors often feel bound to follow .
But studies present strong evidence that financial interests can affect decisions , often without people knowing it .
In Minnesota , psychiatrists collected more money from drug makers from 2000 to 2005 than doctors in any other specialty .
Total payments to individual psychiatrists ranged from $ 51 to more than $ 689,000 , with a median of $ 1,750 .
Since the records are incomplete , these figures probably underestimate doctors ' actual incomes .
Such payments could encourage psychiatrists to use drugs in ways that endanger patients ' physical health , said Dr. Steven E. Hyman , the provost of Harvard University and former director of the National Institute of Mental Health .
The growing use of atypicals in children is the most troubling example of this , Dr. Hyman said .
'' There 's an irony that psychiatrists ask patients to have insights into themselves , but we do n't connect the wires in our own lives about how money is affecting our profession and putting our patients at risk , '' he said .
The Prescription Anya Bailey is a 15-year-old high school freshman from East Grand Forks , Minn. , with pictures of the actor Chad Michael Murray on her bedroom wall .
She has constant discomfort in her neck that leads her to twist it in a birdlike fashion .
Last year , a boy mimicked her in the lunch room .
'' The first time , I laughed it off , '' Anya said .
'' I said : ` That 's so funny .
I think I 'll laugh with you . '
Then it got annoying , and I decided to hide it .
I do n't want to be made fun of . ''
Now she slumps when seated at school to pressure her clenched muscles , she said .
It all began in 2003 when Anya became dangerously thin .
'' Nothing tasted good to her , '' Ms. Bailey said .
Psychiatrists at the University of Minnesota , overseen by Dr. George M. Realmuto , settled on Risperdal , not for its calming effects but for its normally unwelcome side effect of increasing appetite and weight gain , Ms. Bailey said .
Anya had other issues that may have recommended Risperdal to doctors , including occasional angry outbursts and having twice heard voices over the previous five years , Ms. Bailey said .
Dr. Realmuto said he did not remember Anya 's case , but speaking generally he defended his unapproved use of Risperdal to counter an eating disorder despite the drug 's risks .
'' When things are dangerous , you use extraordinary measures , '' he said .
Ten years ago , Dr. Realmuto helped conduct a study of Concerta , an attention deficit hyperactivity disorder drug marketed by Johnson & Johnson , which also makes Risperdal .
When Concerta was approved , the company hired him to lecture about it .
He said he gives marketing lectures for several reasons .
'' To the extent that a drug is useful , I want to be seen as a leader in my specialty and that I was involved in a scientific study , '' he said .
The money is nice , too , he said .
Dr. Realmuto 's university salary is $ 196,310 .
'' Academics do n't get paid very much , '' he said .
'' If I was an entertainer , I think I would certainly do a lot better . ''
In 2003 , the year Anya came to his clinic , Dr. Realmuto earned $ 5,000 from Johnson & Johnson for giving three talks about Concerta .
Dr. Realmuto said he could understand someone 's worrying that his Concerta lecture fees would influence him to prescribe Concerta but not a different drug from the same company , like Risperdal .
In general , he conceded , his relationship with a drug company might prompt him to try a drug .
Whether he continued to use it , though , would depend entirely on the results .
As the interview continued , Dr. Realmuto said that upon reflection his payments from drug companies had probably opened his door to useless visits from a drug salesman , and he said he would stop giving sponsored lectures in the future .
Kara Russell , a Johnson & Johnson spokeswoman , said that the company selects speakers who have used the drug in patients and have either undertaken research or are aware of the studies .
'' Dr.
Realmuto met these criteria , '' Ms. Russell said .
No one has proved that psychiatrists prescribe atypicals to children because of drug company payments .
Indeed , some who frequently prescribe the drugs to children earn no drug industry money .
And nearly all psychiatrists who accept payments say they remain independent .
Some say they prescribed and extolled the benefits of such drugs before ever receiving payments to speak to other doctors about them .
'' If someone takes the point of view that your doctor can be bought , why would you go to an E. R. with your injured child and say , ` Can you help me ? '
'' said Dr. Suzanne A. Albrecht , a psychiatrist from Edina , Minn. , who earned more than $ 188,000 from 2002 to 2005 giving drug marketing talks .
The Industry Campaign It is illegal for drug makers to pay doctors directly to prescribe specific products .
Federal rules also bar manufacturers from promoting unapproved , or off-label , uses for drugs .
But doctors are free to prescribe as they see fit , and drug companies can sidestep marketing prohibitions by paying doctors to give lectures in which , if asked , they may discuss unapproved uses .
The drug industry and many doctors say that these promotional lectures provide the field with invaluable education .
Critics say the payments and lectures , often at expensive restaurants , are disguised kickbacks that encourage potentially dangerous drug uses .
The issue is particularly important in psychiatry , because mental problems are not well understood , treatment often involves trial and error , and off-label prescribing is common .
The analysis of Minnesota records shows that from 1997 through 2005 , more than a third of Minnesota 's licensed psychiatrists took money from drug makers , including the last eight presidents of the Minnesota Psychiatric Society .
The psychiatrist receiving the most from drug companies was Dr. Annette M. Smick , who lives outside Rochester , Minn. , and was paid more than $ 689,000 by drug makers from 1998 to 2004 .
At one point Dr. Smick was doing so many sponsored talks that '' it was hard for me to find time to see patients in my clinical practice , '' she said .
'' I was providing an educational benefit , and I like teaching , '' Dr. Smick said .
Dr. Steven S. Sharfstein , immediate past president of the American Psychiatric Association , said psychiatrists have become too cozy with drug makers .
One example of this , he said , involves Lexapro , made by Forest Laboratories , which is now the most widely used antidepressant in the country even though there are cheaper alternatives , including generic versions of Prozac .
'' Prozac is just as good if not better , and yet we are migrating to the expensive drug instead of the generics , '' Dr. Sharfstein said .
'' I think it 's the marketing . ''
Atypicals have become popular because they can settle almost any extreme behavior , often in minutes , and doctors have few other answers for desperate families .
Their growing use in children is closely tied to the increasingly common and controversial diagnosis of pediatric bipolar disorder , a mood problem marked by aggravation , euphoria , depression and , in some cases , violent outbursts .
The drugs , sometimes called major tranquilizers , act by numbing brain cells to surges of dopamine , a chemical that has been linked to euphoria and psychotic delusions .
Suzette Scheele of Burnsville , Minn. , said her 17-year-old son , Matt , was given a diagnosis of bipolar disorder four years ago because of intense mood swings , and now takes Seroquel and Abilify , which have caused substantial weight gain .
'' But I do n't have to worry about his rages ; he 's appropriate ; he 's pleasant to be around , '' Ms. Scheele said .
The sudden popularity of pediatric bipolar diagnosis has coincided with a shift from antidepressants like Prozac to far more expensive atypicals .
In 2000 , Minnesota spent more than $ 521,000 buying antipsychotic drugs , most of it on atypicals , for children on Medicaid .
In 2005 , the cost was more than $ 7.1 million , a 14-fold increase .
The drugs , which can cost $ 1,000 to $ 8,000 for a year 's supply , are huge sellers worldwide .
In 2006 , Zyprexa , made by Eli Lilly , had $ 4.36 billion in sales , Risperdal $ 4.18 billion and Seroquel , made by AstraZeneca , $ 3.42 billion .
Many Minnesota doctors , including the president of the Minnesota Psychiatric Society , said drug makers and their intermediaries are now paying them almost exclusively to talk about bipolar disorder .
The Diagnoses Yet childhood bipolar disorder is an increasingly controversial diagnosis .
Even doctors who believe it is common disagree about its telltale symptoms .
Others suspect it is a fad .
And the scientific evidence that atypicals improve these children 's lives is scarce .
One of the first and perhaps most influential studies was financed by AstraZeneca and performed by Dr. Melissa DelBello , a child and adult psychiatrist at the University of Cincinnati .
Dr. DelBello led a research team that tracked for six weeks the moods of 30 adolescents who had received diagnoses of bipolar disorder .
Half of the teenagers took Depakote , an antiseizure drug used to treat epilepsy and bipolar disorder in adults .
The other half took Seroquel and Depakote .
The two groups did about equally well until the last few days of the study , when those in the Seroquel group scored lower on a standard measure of mania .
By then , almost half of the teenagers getting Seroquel had dropped out because they missed appointments or the drugs did not work .
Just eight of them completed the trial .
In an interview , Dr. DelBello acknowledged that the study was not conclusive .
In the 2002 published paper , however , she and her co-authors reported that Seroquel in combination with Depakote '' is more effective for the treatment of adolescent bipolar mania '' than Depakote alone .
In 2005 , a committee of prominent experts from across the country examined all of the studies of treatment for pediatric bipolar disorder and decided that Dr. DelBello 's was the only study involving atypicals in bipolar children that deserved its highest rating for scientific rigor .
The panel concluded that doctors should consider atypicals as a first-line treatment for some children .
The guidelines were published in The Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry .
Three of the four doctors on the panel served as speakers or consultants to makers of atypicals , according to disclosures in the guidelines .
In an interview , Dr. Robert A. Kowatch , a psychiatrist at Cincinnati Children 's Hospital and the lead author of the guidelines , said the drug makers ' support had no influence on the conclusions .
AstraZeneca hired Dr. DelBello and Dr. Kowatch to give sponsored talks .
They later undertook another study comparing Seroquel and Depakote in bipolar children and found no difference .
Dr. DelBello , who earns $ 183,500 annually from the University of Cincinnati , would not discuss how much she is paid by AstraZeneca .
'' Trust me , I do n't make much , '' she said .
Drug company payments did not affect her study or her talks , she said .
In a recent disclosure , Dr. DelBello said that she received marketing or consulting income from eight drug companies , including all five makers of atypicals .
Dr. Realmuto has heard Dr. DelBello speak several times , and her talks persuaded him to use combinations of Depakote and atypicals in bipolar children , he said .
'' She 's the leader in terms of doing studies on bipolar , '' Dr. Realmuto said .
Some psychiatrists who advocate use of atypicals in children acknowledge that the evidence supporting this use is thin .
But they say children should not go untreated simply because scientists have failed to confirm what clinicians already know .
'' We do n't have time to wait for them to prove us right , '' said Dr. Kent G. Brockmann , a psychiatrist from the Twin Cities who made more than $ 16,000 from 2003 to 2005 doing drug talks and one-on-one sales meetings , and last year was a leading prescriber of atypicals to Medicaid children .
The Reaction For Anya Bailey , treatment with an atypical helped her regain her appetite and put on weight , but also heavily sedated her , her mother said .
She developed the disabling knot in her back , the result of a nerve condition called dystonia , in 2005 .
The reaction was rare but not unknown .
Atypicals have side effects that are not easy to predict in any one patient .
These include rapid weight gain and blood sugar problems , both risk factors for diabetes ; disfiguring tics , dystonia and in rare cases heart attacks and sudden death in the elderly .
In 2006 , the Food and Drug Administration received reports of at least 29 children dying and at least 165 more suffering serious side effects in which an antipsychotic was listed as the '' primary suspect . ''
That was a substantial jump from 2000 , when there were at least 10 deaths and 85 serious side effects among children linked to the drugs .
Since reporting of bad drug effects is mostly voluntary , these numbers likely represent a fraction of the toll .
Jim Minnick , a spokesman for AstraZeneca , said that the company carefully monitors reported problems with Seroquel .
'' AstraZeneca believes that Seroquel is safe , '' Mr. Minnick said .
Other psychiatrists renewed Anya 's prescriptions for Risperdal until Ms. Bailey took Anya last year to the Mayo Clinic , where a doctor insisted that Ms. Bailey stop the drug .
Unlike most universities and hospitals , the Mayo Clinic restricts doctors from giving drug marketing lectures .
Ms. Bailey said she wished she had waited to see whether counseling would help Anya before trying drugs .
Anya 's weight is now normal without the help of drugs , and her counseling ended in March .
An experimental drug , her mother said , has recently helped the pain in her back .
